FILM COOKBOOK - HUMOR

GENERAL DYNAMICS

NARRATOR
Unreliable narrator - Saying one thing/doing another. Equivocating narrator - Funny because they know their own story but pretend not to. Points to unreliability of truth. Benign violation, etc.

AUTHORITY
Kids acting like adults. Adults acting like kids.

AUSTERITY/SERIOUSNESS
Why is some seriousness so funny (Whit Stillman - Metropolitan, Wes Anderson - Bottle Rocket), while other seriousness (Gomorrah) isn't? Because people are people so serious and austere about things that are so superficial and trivial. (Benign violation theory of humor). In Gomorrah, they're being so serious about things that are actually serious, often life and death. There's a disproportionality between the content and the seriousness with which it is inscribed and communicated. The greater the disproportionality, the greater the effect.

On a deeper level why is it funny? It points to our superficiality. Our unwillingness to let go of superficial or trivial matters. In many cases it points to a class thing, a power thing.

Example: Silver Linings Playbook - Austerity and seriousness and intensity of characters is hilarious. Authority of dad vs son. Adults acting as children.

LYING
Example: Hong Sang-soo - Virgin Stripped Bar of Her Bachelors. Two characters talking: "I remember your name, Soujong. Do you remember mine. Yes, I have a good memory. Well, I have to go. Nice to see you, bye." Why it's funny: Says she remembers his name but then doesn't say it. She's lying in such an absolutely obvious way, it's hilarious. She's telling us she's being honest, and telling us she's lying at the same time. It's a vital contradiction in communication. It's complex, strange, and familiar to us all but with a twist and an added level of straightforwardness.

POWER

BELONGING

CLASH OF OPPOSITES
High/low, east/west, light/dark, old/young. Collision of two worldviews, two civilizations, two castes... like two pieces of flint struck together.

WRONG YET OKAY (BENIGN VIOLATION)
https://jonathansandling.com/what-is-the-benign-violation-theory-of-humour/

STEALING/KLEPTOMANIA
Example: Girl from Modern Love stealing the golf socks from her date who reminded her of her dad.

EXAMPLES IN FILMS

WHIT STILLMAN - BARCELONA
Funny: He says something to the effect of: "She knew very little about the situation, or should I say, not a lot." Why: You're expecting him to say something different when he corrects himself, but instead, he reiterates with a synonym. It doubles down on a power dynamic (she didn't know something) and then provides an unexpected repetition in logic. Bolano-esque. Bolano narrators will often say things like that: her cheeks were flush and moist, evidence she was crying. Stating the obvious can be funny.

BREAKING BAD
Putting on makeup over smashed eye. Hilariously insufficient. Good visual joke.

CLAIRE DENIS - 1994 I CAN'T SLEEP
Guy tells older woman: "Ma'am I'm sorry there's no smoking in here." Camera goes to younger woman who is lighting up in the face of that. Boldly defying the rule. Why is it funny? Sign saying not to do something and doing it anyway - benign violation of a set, stated rule or set of rules.

UNCUT GEMS
Bad guys: "What's this I hear about you resurfacing your pool?" Howard: "I never resurfaced anything." Julia talking about the Weeknd. Howard: "Who is this guy, let me see. He looks stupid." Julia: "This is what's happening." Why is it funny? Two different belief systems. Howard challenging Julia/the world's belief that the Weeknd is cool. Howard thinks he's not. The world thinks he is. Two different scripts, each existing as true to its users. Benign Violation: just verbal abuse, saying someone isn't cool. Doesn't hurt.

AND LIFE GOES ON - ABBAS KIAROSTAMI
Kid goes to pee in field. Feels exposed. Hides behind a very thin sapling. Slapstick. Acting like you're hiding when you're not. Like a mime. Like a clown. Benign violation of two different belief systems: one person thinks they are hidden, the other thinks they are not. And it's harmless. Kids acting like adults. Kids acting with austerity and seriousness of adults.

OLEG - 2018
Class difference. When rich theater woman believes Oleg is an actor, asks him what it's like to work with a genius. She believes something we know to be untrue. And her class and privilege show through, bare naked. Oleg plays along as if he belongs to another caste. He's just been stealing sandwiches from a private party. They invite him in. Interesting dynamic here because the audience is also let in on a secret, so we feel the privilege of dramatic irony. The belonging to the character's world, and the director's world. It's all a powerful dynamic and is rife for humor and intrigue.

BOLANO - SAVAGE DETECTIVES
17 year old poet trying to upstage his professor. Authority, Contention, power struggles, power friction. Being called an "academicist" by the professor and group of poets against him seemed particularly funny to me. Establishment vs revolutionary threat. Why is it funny: when the narrator tells us he said one thing to a character, and then turns around and tells us, the reader, that he feels the exact opposite. Revealing a lie. It's a way to reveal truth. And to create dramatic irony. Letting the audience let in on a secret.

SAFDIE BROTHERS - THE PLEASURE OF BEING ROBBED
Kleptomania is funny. Why? It's not allowed. It's selfish, careless. Unpredictable. Anti-authority of anyone's authority but your own. Benign Violation: No one is being hurt but a norm or moral code is being violated.

Girl steals a bag from guy on the street. Takes it home. Inside is a dog and some kittens.

Ping pong guy who takes himself very seriously. Is making fun of girl who doesn't take it seriously. He accidentally throws his bologna sandwich demonstrating a backhand. Why it's funny? He takes himself so seriously, and can't enjoy even when it's funny to her. Clash of dynamics. Slapstick mixed with determination, austerity. Benign violation: he thinks it's the most important thing in the world. She thinks it's just a game. 180 opposing views... and yet the result is harmless.

Kid takes sand from sandbox. Why is it funny? Sign says not to, dad tells him to. Breaking a rule/violating a norm. Going against an authority. Going against a norm. Telling kid to do something bad. Adult teaching disobedience. Adult being bad. Benign violation: breaking a rule with a harmless result.

SAFDIE BROTHERS - THE ACQUAINTANCES OF A LONELY JOHN
Throwing clothes from washing machine into dryer at laundromat. Why is it funny? Relatable, lazy, physical comedy is funny. Slapstick. Funny way to do something normal. Harmless.

TRUFFAUT - STOLEN KISSES
Go get the dentist upstairs. During a fight. Dentist randomly comes down and slaps the guy around. Why is it funny? Audience expected the dentist to have some kind of chloroform or anesthetic, but instead he just slaps the guy in the face twice. It's not really even exactly clear why they called the dentist, but everyone knew it was the thing to do. He has some kind of distinct authority that is not explained or substantiated. Authority is always at the root of humor. The fact that this authority was granted to the dentist, seemingly a random professional in the building, was funny. Also he was with a patient, making it even funnier.

JUSTIN KELLER'S HUMOR
Assumed authority. Bossing people around. Explaining facts. He assumes his own patriarchy or authority on the situation. It's about authority. Seriousness. Austerity. Power and the willingness of one person to make another person do what they want or to even just make them feel like they could.

DE SICA - THE BICYCLE THIEF
Son of the protagonist wearing a mechanics onesie. He looks like an adult. He's set to clean his father's bicycle with a towel. Says there's not enough light in the room - has a kind of authority to him. Again - assumes his own authority. Opens the window to let some light in. It's a cinematic moment with light, so there's some beauty. Then he goes over to the bike, says there's a dent. Acts incredulous, says, they dented it. Father says it must have been there. Kid says, no they did it, who knows how they store them. He says, if it were me I would have said something, and continues wiping it.

Why is it funny? Reversal of roles. Kid is acting like a dad. Dad acting like a kid. Acting like a stickler. Acting like an authority on the subject. Kid acting like an old man. Child is put into an authority role to help the situation. Perhaps linking with the above there is a theme here of calling in some kind of alternative authority, whether a kid, a dentist, to assist or aid or take over the situation, which points to the helplessness of the party calling for the expert... and points to power, that is funny.

FALLEN ANGELS
Character who is so hopelessly naive. Character who ignores a violent episode in her space. Friction of the violence and reality of the world and ignorance of character. Lynchian. Father figure hitting son playfully. Cooking for son.

STRANGER THAN PARADISE
Explaining how great the city is and why. She asks if he has been there, and he says no, unassumingly. AKA lying, pretending to know about something you don't know but doing it with absolute confidence. The commitment to the austere truth of your lie has to be so sincere so as to be thoughtless. Perfect lies are gracefully woven into context without a thought. But filmmakers jolt us by just splashing the invisible ink revealing serum onto the canvas and show us the lie, either right away, or later... for different effects. Sometimes for humor sometimes to reveal deeper character traits etc.

