FILM COOKBOOK - WRITING GUIDES

PIXAR'S SCREENWRITING TIPS
You admire a character for trying more than for their successes. You gotta keep in mind what's interesting to you as an audience, not what's fun to do as a writer. They can be very different. Trying for theme is important, but you won't see what the story is actually about til you're at the end of it. Now rewrite.

Once upon a time there was ___. Every day, ___. One day ___. Because of that, ___. Because of that, ___. Until finally ___.

Simplify. Focus. Combine characters. Hop over detours. You'll feel like you're losing valuable stuff but it sets you free. What is your character good at, comfortable with? Throw the polar opposite at them. Challenge them. How do they deal?

Come up with your ending before you figure out your middle. Seriously. Endings are hard, get yours working up front. Finish your story, let go even if it's not perfect. In an ideal world you have both, but move on. Do better next time.

When you're stuck, make a list of what WOULDN'T happen next. Lots of times the material to get you unstuck will show up. Pull apart the stories you like. What you like in them is a part of you; you've got to recognize it before you can use it.

Putting it on paper lets you start fixing it. If it stays in your head, a perfect idea, you'll never share it with anyone. Discount the 1st thing that comes to mind. And the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th – get the obvious out of the way. Surprise yourself.

Give your characters opinions. Passive/malleable might seem likable to you as you write, but it's poison to the audience. Why must you tell THIS story? What's the belief burning within you that your story feeds off of? That's the heart of it.

If you were your character, in this situation, how would you feel? Honesty lends credibility to unbelievable situations. What are the stakes? Give us reason to root for the character. What happens if they don't succeed? Stack the odds against.

No work is ever wasted. If it's not working, let go and move on - it'll come back around to be useful later. You have to know yourself: the difference between doing your best & fussing. Story is testing, not refining.

Coincidences to get characters into trouble are great; coincidences to get them out of it are cheating. Exercise: take the building blocks of a movie you dislike. How d'you rearrange them into what you DO like?

You gotta identify with your situation/characters, can't just write 'cool'. What would make YOU act that way? What's the essence of your story? Most economical telling of it? If you know that, you can build out from there.

DAVID ALGER'S FIRST 10 RULES OF IMPROV

SAY YES-AND!
For a story to be built, whether it is short form or long form, the players have to agree to the basic situation and set-up. The who, what, and where have to be developed for a scene to work.

AFTER THE 'AND' ADD NEW INFORMATION
An improvised scene can't move forward or advance unless we add new information. That is why new information is added after the Yes of Yes-and!

DON'T BLOCK
The opposite of saying yes-and is blocking or denial.

AVOID QUESTIONS
A form of blocking (in its more subtle form) is asking questions. Questions force our partners to fill in the information or do the work. It is a way of avoiding committing to a choice or a detail. It is playing it safe. However, on more advanced levels, questions can be used to add information or tell your partner the direction to go in.

FOCUS ON THE HERE AND NOW
Another useful rule is to keep the focus on the here and now. A scene is about the people in the scene. The change, the struggle, the win or loss will happen to the characters on the stage. Focus on what is going on right this at this moment.

ESTABLISH THE LOCATION
Good scenes take place somewhere and at sometime. They do not take place on an empty stage. A location can easily be established in one or two lines without breaking the scene.

BE SPECIFIC - PROVIDE DETAILS
Details are the lifeblood of moving a scene forward. Each detail provides clues to what is important. Details help provide beat objectives and flesh out characters.

CHANGE, CHANGE, CHANGE
Improv is about character change. The characters in a scene must experience some type of change for the scene to be interesting. Characters need to go on journeys, be altered by revelations, experience the ramifications of their choices and be moved by emotional moments.

FOR SERIOUS AND EMOTIONAL SCENES, FOCUS ON CHARACTERS AND RELATIONSHIPS
A long form improv set should contain a variety of scenes. Some scenes will be emotional, some will be tense, and some should be funny. The easiest way to make a scene serious is by focusing on the relationship of those on the stage (their characters).

FOR HUMOR, COMMIT AND TAKE CHOICES TO THE NTH DEGREE OR FOCUS ON ACTIONS/OBJECTS
A good long form set is balanced. Shakespeare knew that too much pathos was wearing on the audience; hence, he had minor characters in humorous scenes such as the drunken porter in MacBeth.

FILMMAKING AND WRITING ADVICE

SCORSESE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bcwkEIO9OK

Write what you know. Have confidence. Write with music in mind. Write empathetic characters who the audience will care about. Watch a lot of movies and study them for visual literacy. Use whoever - family friends etc starting out. Find humanity in your anti heroes - show an underworld. Use anger and humor to get through. Make your own industry. Use projects to learn about yourself and the important life questions.

PAUL SCHRADER - WRITER OF TAXI DRIVER

Contradictory character - Travis Bickle - says to be healthy - pops pills. Puts himself in his own worst places. Hell. Puts himself in hell. Tortures himself. Acts out fantasies and revenge plots on others. You don't need likability you need to be fascinating. Cutting himself off. Pushing himself to the end. Creates a situation where he knows he will be rejected so he can reaffirm his own vile attitudes toward society and create a self-destructive scenario. Write in chapters. Each chapter is a mini story. Study yourself. You are your own material.



