FILM COOKBOOK - DYNAMICS

DIALOGUE
Best dialogue jumps the tracks entirely. Edward Yang's Taipei Story: Daughter says "Lung is more like dad every day" and Mother responds "The price of food keeps going up."

START
Spinning the thread from the very first moment. Question/Answer with Audience. Creates questions for the audience. You should then find ways to guide the audience to little leads that are not answers but rather just continues the chain of questions and mysteries. It's like a conversation with the audience-- question/answer, question/answer etc. But really it's Question, answer, question, question.

Example: Claire Denis - Beau Travail. Who is this? He's this. Why does he act like this? He's foreign. What will that lead to. A-b-c its all leading.

MOVEMENT AND PACE
Action/space for reflection/action/space for reflection. Each character has a core wound/core desire (Alex Tydings). Starting with hesitancy, timidness, weakness, fear, and eventually willing oneself to courage and action... despite the fear... is a powerful dynamic for any character.

Claire Denis 35 Shots of Rum: boyfriend character at first approaches the door in the hallway of his crush (the main girl in her father's apartment) but then turns around and leaves. First attempts sometimes start with a private wish or desire that one does not yet have the courage to enact.

CRUELTY
Being just mean to someone. Criticizing them. But then having it turned on you. Can turn it and make it funny.

DRAMATIC IRONY
Something shared between a single character and the audience, or that only the audience knows.

Example: In Safdie Brothers' We're Going to the Zoo: They dine and dash, but then he runs back and pays the tab, but he lies to the brother and sister in the car, telling them he was going back to get his coat. It's charming in some kind of weird way, like... he wants them to think he's bad, but he's actually good. That's charming, and weirdly funny, and it's a trope that's played not to any one character, but directly to the audience.

COMPRESS TIME
Bresson - strip down everything to its essence. Jump forward. What is not shown, or what is out of frame. What is withheld, omitted, hidden.

Example: Bresson often does this. In A Man Escaped the camera stays in the car when the man escapes. It's waiting for him. They drag him back.

Example: Hong Sang-soo -- the film crew that the actor is talking to out of the frame.

Example: You Can Count on Me 2000.... "What did we used to say" - end of film. Points to title of the film and audience gets to complete the puzzle. Neither actor ever says those words. The movie just ends.

Omitting something creates desire for it and registers it in the mind of the audience as opposed to before their eyes. Builds suspense. Lets the audience complete the puzzle. Or at least just puzzle over it to begin with.

Example: Kiarostami - project - test film for Taste of Cherry - Criterion Channel. Showing a character talking but not cutting to the reverse... either not at all or until the very end of the conversation.

Example: Wong Kar Wai - The Hand - Criterion Channel. As in Kiarostami- not showing who the character is talking to in a 1 shot... creates tension and interest.

ACTS OF PLAYFULNESS
Safdies - We're going to the Zoo: Putting toilet paper out the window of a car. The Pleasure of Being Robbed. A playfulness and aliveness pervades this film. Literal playing of games. Pingpong. Playing a game you aren't really welcome to but doing it anyway, with the same abandon.

CONTRADICTION
Character says one thing, does another. Lies deliberately and the audience knows it. This can create a lot of humor and cast the storytelling into a more complex light. Character saying no they don't want to do something and then doing it anyway. Character lying and asking another character to hide it for them. Holding someone's secret.

STANDING UP FOR SOMEONE ELSE
Brings a sense of humanity. Shows what we are capable of. Shows we can get out of our own heads and selfish habits. Can move audiences to do the same.

Good Time - brothers. Rosie Perez talking about her sister cursing out the nuns at the convent she was abused on the Marc Maron WTF show. Dark Waters - Todd Haynes. Lawyers standing up for common people. Fighting for what is right.

DESIRE
Beautiful bodies, beautiful forms.

SHOT / REVERSE SHOT
Conversational style shot back and forth between two characters.

INEXPLICABLE IDIOSYNCRASIES
Of film and of characters and of place. The usual rules of the world you know don't apply... you are being invited to this special world. Creates a sense of magic.

CHARACTERS WITH STRANGE FUNNY FLAWS
See Cyclo - Tran Anh Hung. Gang member who's mouth always hurts. Poet who gets nosebleeds instead of crying. Child who acts like a fish.

ELEMENTS OF A HEIST MOVIE
https://industrialscripts.com/write-a-heist-movie/

TALKING IN CARS
Brings an intimacy where both characters are facing forward and yet having a conversation. See: Kiarostami car conversation.

CHARACTERS CONTROLLING OR NOT CONTROLLING EACH OTHER
The situation, etc.

CINEMATIC BEAUTY
Things we find beautiful or that we identify with and relate to. Rain on windshield. Nature. Water.

INTENTION AND OBSTACLE
Things standing in the way of characters and the strategies they use to overcome it. Character is offered something: power, money, status, fame, etc. Character denies it, favoring independence, sometimes at great cost. Character accepts it, sacrificing independence, etc.

COOLNESS
Sad sweet music set to violence and revenge. Sinister coolness. Cunning coldness. See - Gomorrah, Wong Kar Wai, etc.

INTERRUPTION OF INTIMACY
Days of Being Wild - Wong Kar Wai. Friend climbs in window while Leslie Cheung's character is getting busy. He was trying to escape the Indian guard downstairs.

LYING
We Own this City HBO. Seeing someone get away with a lie. Dramatic irony. Audience knows. Shows character.

Gomorrah HBO - Season 4 Episode 9. A complicated double cross inside of a complicated double cross. Blue Blood feels that he has a leg up on the Carraccios when one of his guys is called in to the birth of his child at the hospital. The Carraccios are there with some of Blue Blood's guys, the phone rings the guy realizes he has been set up by his girlfriend, she had no choice. On the phone it's Blue Blood the guy plays along with the Carraccios telling Blue Blood nothing is wrong and that they have to celebrate but he also includes what he nearly knows is a lie, commenting on how Valeria was a traitor. What the guy and Blue Blood both know but the Carraccios don't, is that Valerio wasn't a traitor. Telling this lie to Blue Blood gives him the last warning he needs. The guy plays it further even after Blue Blood hangs up, selling it to the audience. There's lots of switching sides going on with Blue Blood and it's really complicated now but this message is clear, and Blue Blood has one more chance to survive.

VIOLENCE
Casino Scorsese 1995 - Joe Pesci Pen Scene. Creates a feeling of ecstasy and redemption. Release. It's a deep, rich feeling. Why? He's the underdog. He's protecting his friend (De Niro).

When people you know need money you see them working at a restaurant, department store. When celebs need money you see them on a commercial. They're exposed. They have to do service out in society. Their form of society.

CRITIC CHARACTER
Never satisfied. Total cynic. Hates everything and everyone except protagonist.

CAROL 2015
Establish desire right away. Forgetting gloves on purpose to have a reason to go back.

MY LIFE
Dad telling me to do what I am, what I believe in. Church pews. Church choir. Church-everyone together. Church-diner after.

NARRATIVE
Benny Safdie - You just need one thing to follow (Buster Keaton).

CHARACTER
Seeing someone trying and failing. They're exposed. Example - Uncut Gems.

PLAYFULNESS
Doing things just for the hell of it.

MY MOVIE
Dad taking us to mall to throw bouncy balls in the hallway. Narration: he got something else when he had kids that I don't know if he was expecting: an audience. Dad balancing on rocks, taking us on tours of the neighborhood, pogo sticking, riding bike backwards.

We're going to the Zoo (Safdie Brothers) - Putting paper towel out the window of a car.

DENIAL
Chungking Express - Can't admit their love is gone. Replace their love with something new... something loveless.

NARRATIVE SYMMETRY
Chungking Express - Mirroring. People torn between people. Unrequited desire. Unreturned love. Death/loss.

PHYSICALITY
Characters on criss-crossing paths. Characters driven to something, regardless of how insane it is. Being in love with two people at the same time.

FALLEN ANGELS
Loving someone because they give you attention. Loving someone because they deny you attention.

REJECTION
Fallen Angels - No show to a date. Ghosting.

NEAR MISSES
Fallen Angels - Passing someone in the hallway. Brushing shoulders.

SOME KIND OF REDEMPTION
Fallen Angels - No one gets who they want, exactly, but they get someone in the end.

GUN

REPETITION
Chungking and Fallen Angels. Creatures of habit. Jobs. Repetitive tasks. Visual motifs. Repeated dates. Songs repeat. Food/eating. Mirrors.

COP

POWER

SYMBOLS
Wong Kar Wai - model airplane for stewardess.

ROAD TRIP
Stranger than Paradise. Movie brings you under a spell.

In the Mood for Love. Music, costume, color, beauty, camera, poetry.

ACTORS
Beautiful to look at. Sympathetic. We want them to succeed. We're on their side.

DESIRE
Tsai Ming-liang Goodbye Dragon Inn. Hold characters within a breath of each other. Proximity. Each character is their own desire line. Never crossing.

CITY FIGURES
Lost and alone. Older damaged figure to show the comparison to the young and able and sexy. Multiple forms of desire. Old young gay straight. This place is haunted — after that characters are on the alert.

Every shot is a painting. Every shot is a photograph.

NARRATOR
Narrative of the interior dialogue of characters.

CAMERA
Fallen Angels - Experimental camera. Playful.

Chungking Express - Step printing. Shoot at 12 fps and slow down to 24 fps. Fairly open shutter to create motion blur.

GREAT MUSIC
Accentuates the moment. Daddy Longlegs.

ENDING
Use it sparsely, or not at all, or not until the very, very end (Bresson).

GOODFELLAS
Steadicam Shot: Shows power: valet, backdoor man, beats the line, enters through kitchen. All the people he shakes hands with. In film, whenever someone is shown to have special power they are shown entering the establishment through the kitchen.

HONG SANG-SOO
Camera - Wide, sticks, pan, zoom. Long takes, no cuts.

MEN
Pathetic, desperate, lying, disrespectful, selfish.

DESIRE LINE
Point, counterpoint, repeat. Lead the audience in one direction and then surprise them, turn it 180.
	


